Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to push our complex app up onto the web.
Now you might remember way back when we created our simple To-Do app that we used a platform named Heroku
to host our application.
So that's exactly what we're going to do again with our complex app, right?
So instead of our application only living on local host, on our personal computer, we want to deploy
it or push it up publicly so that our friends and family can visit it from where you are at.
So go ahead and visit Heroku dot com.
You might still be logged in or if it's been enough days or weeks since you completed the simple to
do app, just go ahead and log in once again to you or Heroku account.
OK, but once you are logged in to your Heroku account, you should see a dashboard that looks something
like this.
In my case, here, I can see the simple To-Do app that we created earlier in the course.
And right now, we just want to create a brand new project or app within Heroku.
So towards the top right corner of this screen, we see this new menu item.
If I click on that, we can then choose Create New App.
So go ahead and do this with me right now.
Create new app.
Choose a name for your app and remember this name is unique.
So if I choose something super generic like my app, you can see that that is not available, so you
need to come up with the unique name that no one on Heroku has ever used before.
So maybe I'll try complex app.
Cool.
That's available now.
You'll need to come up with something slightly different.
Feel free to choose any name you want.
The name does not matter.
Choose your region and then let's click Create app.
OK, at this point, go ahead and leave this browser tab open.
But for now, we're going to switch over to our text editor.
You might remember when we pushed our simple to do app up to Heroku that we used a technology named
Gitte to transfer the files.
Well, as you might have guessed, we're going to use Git once again for this app or for this project.
Now, before we jump into the command line and create a git repo and commit our changes and push them
up to Heroku, we need to do a few things first.
So right now, I want to draw your attention to our Dot EMV file.
Go ahead and click on EMV.
So right now, this contains a few things.
It contains our connection string with a username and password for the MongoDB Atlas user.
It contains which port number we want to run on, and it contains our JSON web token secret.
Now, clearly, these values are vital to our application running successfully.
However, I absolutely do not want to send this file along with our other files to Heroku, right?
Because the whole point of environment variables is that they are unique, or at least they have the
chance to be unique for each environment.
Right.
So maybe on local host, yes, I want to run on Port three thousand, but on Heroku, I want our application
to use whatever port number Heroku wants to use.
So here's what I'm going to do.
I am specifically not going to include this dot EMV file in my git repository.
Instead, I'm going to go into the Heroku dashboard and manually add the environment variables that
we actually need.
So, for example, let's start with connection stream.
I want you to select your connection string value into your clipboard, so go ahead and copy it.
So that's just right after this equals sign.
So then begin selecting there and then select all the way to the end of the line and copy that into
your clipboard.
OK, now I want you to jump back to the Heroku dashboard and for the new project or app that you just
created, I want you to look for the Settings link.
So as of today, Settings is on the far right.
Go ahead and click on Settings and then from the Settings screen.
The second section here is named Config VARs.
Go ahead and click on this button that says Reveal config VARs.
OK.
Currently, we have not created any yet, but here you see fields for key and value.
So in this key field, I want you to type in in all capital letters, connection string.
And as you might have guessed in the value field, just paste in your clipboard.
OK, then go ahead and click Add.
Cool.
Now let's add another one for our JWT secret.
So back in our text editor, we don't need to move over.
Port equals three thousand.
We want our app to use whatever port number Heroku wants to use, but we do want to move over our JWT
secret.
So right after the equal sign for that, just copy your entire value into your clipboard.
Back in Heroku for the key type in all capitals JWT secret for the value.
Just paste in your clipboard and be sure to click Add.
Cool.
Now I do also want to mention that this is a great way to use different databases.
One for your local development copy and then a different database for your real production copy.
Cool.
At this point, let's jump back into our text editor.
And up next, before we create a git repo within our project directory, I first want to create a git
ignore file and tell our repo to ignore our Dot EMV file.
So within the root of the project, just right click and choose new file.
The name of this file needs to be exact.
So it begins with a dot and then it's Git and that's git with an eye as in the version control system.
So git and then ignore within this new Dot Get Ignore file.
Let's begin by saying Dot EMV lets drop down.
I also do not want to include the node modules folder within our repo that would just be a waste of
bandwidth in space.
So let's say node underscore modules.
There's no need to keep this folder in your repo because as long as you have your packaged JSON file,
well, remember, that's sort of your recipe, right?
It keeps a running list of all the packages or ingredients that you need.
Now, every time you push to Heroku, the Heroku service is going to look within our packaged JSON file
and automatically download and install all of our packages or dependencies.
So we definitely don't need to include them in the repo.
OK, let's go ahead and save this doc.
Get Ignore file.
And now we just have one more step.
Before we are ready to send our files over, we need to make sure that Heroku knows how to initially
start or launch our application.
To do that, we just jump in to our packaged JSON file.
And in this scrips area, we need to make sure that we have a script or task named Start.
It needs to be that exact name.
So right about here I would just say quotes start colon quotes.
Be sure to include a comma at the end.
And then what do we want to include for the actual command?
Well, we don't want to use Node Mod. We don't want the server randomly restarting, so we would just
use node itself.
So node space and then the file that we launch is debugging.
Yes.
Let's give this file a save.
OK, and next, we want to push our files up onto the web, but not to Heroku directly.
While you can do that using Roku's CLI tool.
It's a lot more complicated than just pushing our files to GitHub and then connecting your GitHub account
to your Heroku account.
If you don't know how to push your files to a GitHub repo, that's OK.
Back in our simple crud application chapter of this course, we walked through how to use GitHub desktop.
Step by step.
So if you need to, you can go back and watch that video from that earlier chapter, or you can use
command line git whatever you're comfortable with.
But essentially you just want to push these files to a new private GitHub repository.
So feel free to pause this video lesson while you go and set that up.
For example, off camera.
I just set up this private repo called complex app, so these are all the same files we've been working
on and creating together.
They exist on my GitHub account.
So now you just want to go back into Heroku from this Heroku project you set up at the start of this
video.
Let's click on Deploy.
If we scroll down just a little bit, we want to use this option here where it says deployment method.
We want to connect to GitHub.
If you're clicking this for the very first time on this Heroku account, GitHub will need your permission
in order to let Heroku access it.
So be on the lookout for that potential pop up.
Do you give it permission?
And then down here you can just search for whatever you named your GitHub repository.
In my case, I named it complex app.
So if I search for that, yep, that's the one I'm interested in.
So once you find your GitHub repo, just click Connect.
Cool from here.
Just scroll down a little bit.
I'm going to enable automatic deploys, so I'll click that and then finally, scroll down and we want
to perform this initial first time deploy manually.
So in the future, you don't need to ever click deploy again any time you push changes to your master
or main branch.
It will just automatically get redeployed.
But for this very first time, let's click Deploy Branch.
If you scroll down a little bit, you can see real time progress updates on what Heroku is doing, right,
so it's using your packaged JSON file to install all of the npm dependencies.
Cool, so it finishes.
Now you can use this view button right here, or you can always scroll back up to the top of this page
and use this open app link.
Go ahead and click on Open App.
Awesome.
Now, obviously your URL is going to be different than mine, so it's your unique app name and then
dot Heroku app dot com.
I strongly encourage you to share your URL with your friends and family after all of the hard work you've
put into this application.
There's no better feeling than sharing it with the people you care about.
Trust me, it'll make the accomplishment feel ten times more meaningful.
Encourage them to sign up for an account and even join you in the live chat feature.
So really quick just to test that everything's working, I will log in with my brand account.
OK, and then maybe in Mozilla Firefox, I'll log in with my barks a lot account.
Barks a lot.
And if I open up the chat in both Windows Hello.
Hi, I'm a dog.
Cool.
Everything is working perfectly.
If you made it this far in the course, congratulations, you have launched your first meaningful full
stack application.
The number of different technologies that you stitched together to create this experience is definitely
something that's worth celebrating.
And at the heart of all of this is the JavaScript language itself, which you now speak fluently.
Now there are a few additional lessons or videos in the course.
But before we move on to those, I do encourage you to go celebrate a bit with the amount of time,
effort and attention to detail that you just put into this app.
You deserve a small break.
Savor this moment.
This is a big milestone.
Now coming up next, there's going to be one super quick video on how you would send e-mail from one
of your applications.
And then after that, there will be a quick video on next steps to take.
What should you learn next?
And also maybe a few quick career tips or just words of advice.
I'm so excited you made it this far, and I'm even more excited to see you in the next several lessons.
So let's keep things rolling, and I'll see you then.